APPENDIX 6: SOURCES OF POSSIBLE ERROR
The queue lengths for a few of the ramps (3A3, 3C1 and 3C3) were found to be negative over short time periods. Now this can happen only if the number of arrivals measured during a particular interval of time is less than the number of departures plus the previous queue length.   There are several possibilities:
The detectors were not working. But if it were the cause, then they would not be giving any count at all, rather than giving some low count (possibly ..) as now. It is unlikely the detectors would be in a state in between working and not-working. And they would not be also behaving intermittently as working fine at some times and not working at other times….(This might be a remote possibility though). 
Cars enter the ramp somewhere in between the arrival and departure detectors. If the ramp detectors are placed badly, this may occur.  
Cars arriving on the ramp could sidetrack the loop detectors, and as a result the detectors would not pick up the signal.  If the detectors were properly placed, the cars would not really sidetrack the detectors (considering that the detectors are placed in the middle of the road) unless they were banking at a high speed, which is rare, or they would not be able to take the center of the road as it was already occupied by other cars forming a queue over the middle of the road, where the detector is located. But detectors are able to pick up signals from passing cars even if the cars were not passing directly over the detector. A 6 ft by 6 ft detector is able to track any changes in the magnetic field up to 3 ft on either side. Normally the on ramps are hardly more than 18 ft wide and cars are certainly greater than 3 ft wide. So that leaves only 3 ft for the car to veer through on each  side of the road without being detected, which they can’t possibly do (as their width is more than 3 ft,) So their influence on the detector would be felt some way or the other. However if the number of loops in the detector are less than 3 or 4, the detector however might be weak and unable to detect cars passing far from it. Again this is a singular  possibility only. If the roads are covered by a wider loop than 6 ft by 6 ft, then not detecting the cars would be more unlikely. 
This leads to another possibility of errors. While calculating we had neglected the arrival rates of the HOVs as they were very few and far in between, and they would not be forming a queue. But they may have passed over the departure loop detectors (depending on location) which would then give their counts too, which we had neglected while considering the arrivals. This could have led to the departure rates being shown more than the arrival rates, which can’t be possible in reality. So there might be an option for computing the queue lengths considering the passage of the HOVs too and checking out the real working condition of the detectors.   Again this depends on the physical configuration of the ramps.

