APPENDIX 7: NON-LINEAR VALUE OF TIME

The literature on value of travel time is vast, but the part of that literature that focuses on differentiating travel time by the quality of the trip is almost non-extant.  Some mode choice literature values travel times by transit legs separately (access, wait, and in-vehicle transit time) (e.g. Ben-Akiva and Lerman 1985), but no similar study exists on the highway side. 

Hensher (ITS-WP-00-9) considers that the empirical valuation of travel time savings is a derivative of the ratio of parameter estimates in a discrete choice model. The most common formulation (multinomial logit) imposes strong restrictions on the profile of the unobserved influences on choice as represented by the random component of a preference function. In this paper he contrasts the values of travel time savings derived from five discrete choice models – multinomial logit, heteroskedastic extreme value, covariance heterogeneity logit, mixed (or random parameter) logit and multinomial probit. The empirical setting is urban car commuting and non-and non-commuting in six locations in New  Zealand.  Similarly, The Preliminary Finnish Value-of-Time Study for Long Distance Travel explored the theory behind the assessment of and to work out models for the estimation of the value of travel time. Data of the survey of the Finnish high speed railway alternatives north-east of Helsinki are used in the modeling. The value of time is derived from a mode choice model. The attributes of modes are travel cost and time, and departures per day. Taste variations in values of time are examined by segmenting the observations by trip purpose, mode, and personal gross income. The ratio of value of time and income is not constant.
 
Bone (1987)  reviews the practice of ascribing a dollar value to travel time savings arising from transport investment projects. The concept of time value is first discussed, drawing a distinction between its application in predicting travel demand and in economic evaluation. The paper suggests that the present uniform treatment of time savings does not allow level of service measures of the transport system to enter the economic evaluation process explicitly, although value of time implicitly includes some measure of the utility of travel. He argues that it would be desirable to separate the value of the travel experience from the opportunity value of the time saved although this may be difficult to achieve.

Hensher treats the topic (ITS-WP-00-17) of the behavioral value of travel time savings (VTTS).  Numerous studies have been conducted to shed light on how much an individual or firm is willing to pay to save a unit of time, the majority of empirical studies have used essentially the same data metric and model estimation procedure. The most popular approaches have used either revealed preference (RP) or stated preference (SP) data and a multinomial logit (MNL) choice model to identify marginal rates of substitution between travel time and price of a trip. This paper highlights the potential gains from a more carefully considered structure of the unobserved effects conditioning the form of a discrete choice model, and hence the possible misinterpretation from the simpler Multinomial Logit (MNL) specification. It demonstrates the implication for VTTS of serial correlation between the SP treatments, covariance amongst alternatives, the presence of individual specific (random) effects or heterogeneity, and differential variance of the unobserved effects.

David Hensher and Truong P Truong ( ), note that travel time can’t be saved, it can only be transferred from one activity to another. This point is reinforced in Levinson and Kanchi (2000), who study the changes in travel and activity times resulting from additional infrastructure.

Algers, Bergstrom, Dahlberg and Dillen (Mixed logit estimation of  value of travel time,  1998) argue that the value of time is calculated as a trade off between in-vehicle time coefficient and the cost coefficient. A common segmentation is the trip purpose.. work trips or business trips, Sometimes trip lengths and income levels are also used to differentiate value of time in trips. Here the authors apply mixed logit specifications to allow parameters to vary in the population when estimating the value of time for long distance travel. The main conclusion that the authors draw is that the value of time is highly sensitive to the way the model is specified. It is found that the value of time is significantly lower when the coefficients are assumed to be normally distributed in the population in contrast to the traditional case where they are treated as fixed. Also when the authors allowed the parameters to vary log normally in the population, it was found that the models did not converge unless the dispersion parameter of the log-normal distribution was constrained. 

Johansson ( Paper III, of “Four papers on the contingent valuation and stated preference methods,1999) uses stated preference data for the estimation of time and safety for work trips. In standard and random parameters logit models, the respondent’s modal choice is related to the perceived time, cost, safety and the environment friendliness of the available alternatives. These parameters are shown to have a significant effect on the choice of work trip travel mode. From the estimated models, the attribute values of time and safety are assessed.

Kawamura ( Urban Planning and Policy program, UIC, TRB 79th meet, Washington DC) estimated the value of time for trucks from the stated preference data collected in California. Truckers were asked about a choice between an existing free road versus a toll facility for different combinations of travel time and cost. Estimation was based on the point of diversion at which the switch of facility occurred in the stated preference questions, and also using a modified logit model in which the coefficients to be estimated were assumed to be distributed lognormally across the population. The former approach revealed that the value of time can be well replicated with a lognormal distribution. of time. The author draws  lines of difference between the three methods hitherto used to measure the value of travel time saved by the truck operators: 1) the cost savings method, which is based on the cost savings to operators per unit of time, 2) the revenue (net profit) method, which estimates the net increase in profit resulting from the reduction in travel time (1), and 3) the willingness to pay method, which measures the "perceived" value of time from observed or stated choices under trade-off situations involving time and money.

Casey, Vukina and Danielson (1995) test two alternative specifications for the opportunity cost of time in travel cost models. The standard travel cost survey design is enriched to include a contingent valuation type question about peoples' willingness to accept compensation to forgo a precisely defined recreational experience. It is hypothesized that individually revealed value of time more appropriately reflects the opportunity costs of time associated with a particular aspect of recreation than the wage rate which measures the trade-off between work and leisure, generally. Their  results  indicate a better overall fit for the models with the elicited value of individual consumer's time than for the models with the more traditional hourly earnings (wage rates). The importance of the correct measurement of the opportunity cost time is illustrated by showing that estimated consumer surpluses based on two different value of time measurements differ significantly. 

Bone (1987) reviews the practice of ascribing a dollar value to travel time savings arising from transport investment projects. The concept of time value is first discussed, drawing a distinction between its application in predicting travel demand and in economic evaluation. Present New Zealand practice is reviewed and its relationship to practice overseas. The general findings of recent British studies are noted and the initial stages of an investigation sponsored by the New Zealand urban transport council are described. The paper suggests that our present uniform treatment of time savings does not allow level of service measures of the transport system to enter the economic evaluation process explicitly, although value of time implicitly includes some measure of the utility of travel. He suggests separation of the value of the travel experience from the opportunity value of the time saved although this may be difficult to achieve. Some doubts are expressed as to the validity of suppositions embodied in travel choice models used to derive travel time values. It is argued that the acceptance or rejection of an equity (or average) opportunity value of time savings is an important matter of policy which should be decided before any move to ascribe differing values of non-work time according to socio-economic characteristics of the travelling public

Knudson (Oregon Department of transportation) conducted studies for 2 years (1997, 98) in order to report and document estimated values of travel-time for vehicles in Oregon. Studies within ODOT have used a number of different estimates for the value of travel-time. Costs associated with travel are considered to be of 2 primary types…Vehicle operating costs and the value of travel time. The study basically focuses on the costs associated with travel time. Travel times behaving in nonlinear fashion are estimated depending upon purpose of trip, selection and availability of relevant data, methodology and underlying assumptions when building the estimate and the selection and availability of detailed data. Costs associated with travel-time include employers’ cost of employees traveling on-the-job, depreciation of inventory, and spoilage cost of goods being transported. For other drivers, travel-time costs include the opportunity cost of their time spent driving – time that could be spent doing something else. The value of one hour of travel-time is estimated for six vehicle categories using national data. Further estimates are made using Oregon data for three more general vehicle categories. 

Cohen and Southworth (1999) try to estimate the dollar value of travel time due to  unanticipated freeway incidents. Apart from providing a simple model for estimating the mean and variance of time lost due to incidents on freeways also reviews methods for assigning a monetary value to the variability that such incidents induce to daily travel. The authors argue that avoiding the time spent in travelling is a non- productive activity against which there is an opportunity cost. A common approach to placing a cost to the extra time spent in travel is to assess the value of travel time in terms of hours lost multiplied by some fraction of gross hourly wage. The authors assign a method to measuring the travel time variability from an incident analysis procedure. 

Small, Noland, Chu and Lewis (1999) try  to develop methodologies for measuring the effects of congestion on the values highway users place on travel-time savings and predictability. The methodologies were used to generate values for factors for different degrees of congestion. The study also defines an approach for incorporating these factors in highway user-cost estimates. 

REFERENCES


Ben-Akiva M. and Lerman S. 1985   Discrete Choice Analysis, MIT Press, Cambridge MA 
Bone, IH 1987. The Value Of Travel Time - Savings In Project Evaluation. New Zealand Roading Symposium 1987. Volume 4  National Roads Board, Wellington New Zealand 
Bruzelius Nils 1979 The value of travel time : theory and measurement London : Croom Helm
Bureau of Transport and Communication Economics  "Values of Travel Time Savings Used in Road Project Evaluation: a Cross-Country/Jurisdiction Comparison," Proceedings, Australasian Transportation Research Forum, Vol.1, (October, 1992) (Bureau of Transport and Communication Economics) Canberra, 215-30.
Casey, James F.; Vukina, Tomislav; Danielson, Leon E., "The Economic Value of Hiking: Further Considerations of Opportunity Cost of Time in Recreational Demand Models," Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 27(2), December 1995, 658-68.
Cohen Harry and Frank Southworth “On the measurement and valuation of travel time       variability due to incidents on freeways”  Journal of transportation and Statistics, Dec., 1999)
Greene David L., Donald W. Jones, Mark A. Delucchi, (ed.)The Full Costs and Benefits of Transportation Contributions to Theory, Method and Measurement
Heaver T.D.and W.G.Waters II "Values of Travel Time Savings in Road Transport Project Evaluation," (W.G.Waters II) World Transport Research (refereed Proceedings of the World Conference on Transport Research) Vol.3, 213-23, Transport Policy, (New York: Elsevier), 1996.
Heggie, Im G. 1976. Modal choice and the value of travel time Oxford : Clarendon Press, 1976.
Hensher David A The Sensitivity of the Valuation of Travel Time Savings to the Specification of Unobserved Effects (appeared in the special issue of Transportation research Part E) ITS-WP-00-17:   
Hensher David A The Valuation of Travel Time Savings for Urban Car Drivers: Evaluating Alternative Model Specifications  ITS-WP-00-9:
Hensher David and Truong P Truong “Measurement of Travel time values and Opportunity cost from a discrete choice model”, Economic Journal , Published by the Royal economics Society , Volume – 95, No 378, 438-451
Hensher, David A “Perception of Commuter mode choice : A hypothesis " Urban studies, Vol-12, Feb; Valuation of travel time, Report on a conference held in London, August, (Department of Environment(UK) , 1975)
Hensher, David A 1976  “The value of commuter travel time savings : Empirical Estimation using an alternative Valuation Model”, by Hensher.; Transportation Studies unit working paper no. 8 , University of Oxford, ( Journal of Transport Economics and policies, Vol X , No. 2, May 1976, pages: 167-176.
Hensher, David A 1976 “Review of studies leading to existing values of Travel time”, Valuation of Travel time, Transportation Research Record, No. 587, Washington D.C., TRB, October; 30-41
Hensher, David A.  Valuation of Interurban Travel time savings: A study in choice of route”  International Journal of Transport Economics, Vol – IV, No. 1 , April, Pages: 69-80.
Hensher, David A. and W E Hotchkins “ Money value of Travel Time Savings”, Australian Road Research Board Conference, Vol-7 , Part 2 , August : 55-59
Knudson Becky “The Value of Travel-time: Estimates of the Hourly Value of Timefor Drivers, Passengers, and Cargo in Oregon, 1997 and 1998”
Levinson, D. and Kanchi, S (2000) Whence Induced Demand: How Access and Activity Affect Demand. Presented at the International Association of Travel Behavior Research July 2000 Gold Coast, Australia
Noland, Robert B., and Kenneth A. Small, "Travel-Time Uncertainty, Departure Time Choice, and the Cost of Morning Commutes," Transportation Research Record, 1493 (1995), pp. 150-158.
Preliminary Finnish Value-of-Time Study for Long Distance Travel.   HYPERLINK http://www.hut.fi/u/jkurri/lmtvabs.html http://www.hut.fi/u/jkurri/lmtvabs.html
Quandt Richard E. (ed.) 1970 The demand for travel: theory and measurement.  Lexington, Mass., Heath Lexington Books 
Small, K. A.; Noland, R; Chu, X; Lewis, D “Valuation Of Travel-Time Savings And Predictability In Congested Conditions For Highway User-Cost Estimation”
          Transportation Studies, Report for the B.C. Ministry of Transportation and Highways, Planning Services Branch, (June, 1994) 14pp.; published in their The Value of Travel Time in British Columbia: a Compendium of Reports 1994.
Waters W.G.  "The Value of Travel Time and the Link with Income," () Proceedings, Canadian Transportation Research Forum (Saskatoon: University of Saskatchewan Printing Services), 1992, pp.501-1.
Waters W.G. II "The Value of Time Savings for the Economic Evaluation of Highway Projects in British Columbia,"  Research Report for Planning Services Branch, B.C. Ministry of Transportation and Highways, UBC Centre for Transportation Studies, March 1992, 160 pp.; published in The Value of Travel Time in British Columbia: a Compendium of Reports (Victoria: Ministry of Transportation and Highways, Planning Services Branch) 1994.
Waters W.G. II "The Value of Travel Time Savings and the Link with Income: Implications for Public Project Evaluation,"  International Journal of Transportation Economics Vol. 21, No.3, (Oct., 1994) 243-53.
Waters W.G. II “Values of Travel Time Savings Used in Road Project Evaluation: a Cross-Country/Jurisdiction Comparison”, Proceedings, Australasian Transportation Research Forum, Vol.1, (October, 1992) (Bureau of Transport and Communication Economics) Canberra, 215-30.
Waters W.G. II and Carey Wong "The Value of Commercial Vehicle Travel Time Savings for the Economic Evaluation of Highway Investments,"  14th annual Conference of Australian Institutes of Transport Research, Sydney, Dec., 1992.
Waters W.G. II and Carey Wong, "The Value of Commercial Vehicle Travel Time Savings for the Economic Evaluation of Highway Investments,"  14th annual Conference of Australian Institutes of Transport Research, Sydney, Dec, 1992.
Waters W.G. II and James A. Evans "A Pilot Survey of Motorists' Value of Travel Time Savings,"  The Value of Travel Time in British Columbia: a Compendium of Reports (Victoria: Ministry of Transportation and Highways, Planning Services Branch) 1994.
Waters W.G.II "Issues in the Evaluation of Travel Time Savings for Road Project Evaluation,"  in Tae H.Oum, ed., The Latest Developments in Transport Economics and Their Policy Implications, Korea Transport Institute, Seoul (1995).
Waters W.G.II and Kevin Megale , “Supplementary Report on the Value of Commercial Vehicle Time Savings (VCVTS) for Heavy Trucks,"  UBC Centre for Transportation Studies
Wong, C. K.Megale and W.G.Waters II "The Value of Commercial Vehicle Time Savings for the Evaluation of Highway Investments - a Resource Savings Approach"  J. of Transportation Research Forum (1995).

